---
title: "Benchmarking the Dynamic Modes of Stratosphere-Troposphere Coupling in Northern Annular Modes (NAM) in CMIP6 Models"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2026-2-1-Chen2026
year: 2026
author: Chen, Gang and Xiuyuan Ding
venue: 'Geophysical Research Letters'
venue_cit: '<i>Geophysical Research Letters</i>, 53, e2025GL121278, doi:10.1029/2025GL121278.'
citation: 'Chen, Gang and Xiuyuan Ding, 2026: Benchmarking the Dynamic Modes of Stratosphere-Troposphere Coupling in Northern Annular Modes (NAM) in CMIP6 Models, <i>Geophysical Research Letters</i>, 53, e2025GL121278, doi:10.1029/2025GL121278.'
---
ABSTRACT:
 The downward influence of extreme stratospheric events is typically described by the evolution of the Northern Annular Mode (NAM) across atmospheric levels. However, the dynamics and uncertainty in vertical coupling are not fully resolved. By applying the linear inverse model (LIM) to daily, multi-level NAM indices from reanalysis and CMIP6 models, we show that the leading eigenmode of NAM displays a deep structure extending from the stratosphere to the surface, with an e-folding timescale of about 30~days in reanalysis data. This stratospheric mode captures the downward propagation of NAM anomalies during weak polar vortex events, further supported by the LIM simulations forced by white noise. Analysis of inter-model spread suggests that the LIM-based estimates can reduce the uncertainty in the surface response to stratospheric extreme events by more than 50\%. These findings provide dynamic insights into stratosphere-troposphere coupling of NAM and its representations in climate models. , Plain Language Summary Extreme events in the stratosphere can influence weather patterns at the Earth&apos;s surface, often described through changes in the Northern Annular Mode (NAM) across different altitudes. However, the details of this vertical coupling are not fully understood. Using a linear inverse model to analyze daily NAM indices at different altitudes, we found that the leading mode of NAM extends from the stratosphere down to the surface and persists for about 30~days. This stratospheric mode describes the downward propagation of NAM during weak polar vortex events, as shown in both reanalysis data and CMIP6 climate models. Differences among climate models indicate that the timescale and vertical structure of this stratospheric mode are key to understanding how weak stratospheric vortex events affect surface conditions. This approach offers insights into how stratosphere-troposphere interactions in NAM are represented in climate models. , Key Points A reduced-order model is presented for daily, multi-level Northern Annular Mode (NAM) indices in reanalysis and models A deep stratospheric mode of NAM is found to be crucial for stratosphere-troposphere coupling The stratospheric mode reduces the uncertainty of surface response to stratospheric extreme events

Download paper: [journal website](https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2025GL121278)
